[Applause]
man that's a lot of australians
well thank you very much for coming out
it's
really quite something to see all of you
here as dave said this is the
largest venue that that we've spoken at
i i
had a couple of debates with sam harris
one in dublin and one in
london that were in larger venues but
as far as speaking specifically about
12 rules this is oh damn near twice as
big
as the next biggest auditorium i think
we were at
the apollo in london and it held 30 it
held 3 000 people and so that was good
but this is
this is really something um
there must be quite a dearth of things
to do in melbourne tonight
[Laughter]
no seriously though um it's remarkable
to see
all of you come out to engage in
what i believe to be fundamentally a
serious conversation about
psychological and philosophical and
perhaps
certainly ethical perhaps even religious
issues and
you know who would have ever guessed
that there was a mass market for that
you know so and apparently there is
and maybe we're smarter than we think we
are and
i have a suspicion that that might be
the case
one of the things that i've noticed
about the intellectual dark web types
you know that's a name that eric
weinstein you might be familiar with him
came up with and
it wasn't like we all got together and
built a little fort out in our backyard
and
you know called it the intellectual dark
web um
he just happened to coin the term and um
and a number of people were included for
one reason or another and
i i've spent a fair bit of time trying
to understand
why that coinage stuck and what it might
be that united this
very strangely diverse range of people
and
i think it's really three things one is
that each of them
from joe rogan to shapiro um
the same with uh with with uh sam harris
are all people on dave are all people
have their independent media platforms
right they're
they're not part of a corporate
structure they're not beholden to anyone
they're financially independent um and
and
they've built that themselves and and so
they can say what they want
and so that's kind of cool to see that
happening to see
the technology that that enables
online video which is really a complex
form of broadcasting and also online
podcasts which is
a complex form of radio um
enable that sort of independent
journalism
as and to see people able to um
not precisely exploit that but make use
of it that's that's a very good thing
and i i'm thinking that that might be a
real positive
uh outcome of the social media
revolution
i mean there's lots of downsides i think
twitter is a downside
um it's it's a pretty rough platform and
the commentary on
social media platforms can be pretty
brutal we really haven't figured out how
to regulate it well yet
so that it's civilized not so that it's
censored right because that that's a
mistake censored and civilized aren't
the same thing
properly regulated is civilized and we
don't know how to do that but
youtube and podcasts have opened up a
huge market for intellectual material
in a manner that's never really happened
before and you're also seeing this
happen
with audio books you know the audiobook
market has absolutely exploded in the
last
five years about a third of books sold
now are audio books
and so and and that seems to be because
people having become accustomed to
podcasts
are downloading um audiobooks and
listening to them in their cars or when
they're exercising or
when they're doing housework or you know
and it's one of the advantages of this
new media type is that you have it on
demand
and you can play it at your leisure or
when you're working for that matter and
so
you know i have all sorts of
working-class guys come up and talk to
me after the show
long-haul truck drivers and those sorts
of people who have
a lot of time you know obviously they're
concentrating on what they're doing but
they have
they have spare time to listen and
they're listening to you know
three-hour joe rogan podcasts on all
sorts of
abstract subjects and and my lectures as
well and
it's really something to see that
happening and so
that's one element of the intel
intellectual dark web that's
that's interesting and tied in with the
new media revolution
because it really is a revolution to
have video on demand like that and
to have it so easy to produce and to
have it permanent
and to have it distributed everywhere in
the world and to have it
subtitled in all sorts of different
languages and to have it essentially
free of charge and able to be produced
in a day or two i mean it's
and and and then it's permanent like a
book it's really something new
and and then the same with the audio
version and
i do believe it it may be the case that
more people can like a lot of people are
intimidated by books
for all sorts of reasons i mean highly
literate reading is
a relatively rare skill like it's
it's not overwhelmingly rare but it's
relatively rare
but listening man people can listen you
know
and so all of a sudden this complicated
information is available
to people who can listen and maybe
that's 10 times as many people who are
likely to read or maybe it's 50 times as
many people who are likely to read
so god only knows what the consequence
of that is going to be
that could be a real education
revolution and
hopefully we'll be smart enough to take
advantage of that carefully over the
next 10 years and
find out if that is the case i'm
optimistic about it because
it one of the things that really is cool
about the internet is that
you know if you want to learn something
you can pretty much type in your
question whatever it is and
somebody will have put up a youtube
video that
tells you how to do it and you know you
might have to sort through two or three
of them before you find someone who's
done a very high level job of the
explanation but they've done it and
often you know they run an ad maybe and
monetize a little bit but mostly
i would say it's it's an altruistic
gesture and so
that's really something and the other
thing the intellectual dark web people
have in common
is that um well they're opinionated and
and
and and fairly tough-minded but
more importantly they don't think their
audience is
stupid and that's really something and
and
and i think they're right i'm not going
to
assume in instantaneously
that that's a consequence of something
particularly moral about the people who
make up that group
i think it is a testament to their faith
in the essential nature
in in in the essential quality of human
nature
but i also do think it's a reflection of
the medium itself because
it's funny when i step into a television
studio now like a classic television
studio which happens from time to time
and which is apparently going to happen
with australia's q a on the 25th which
should be quite interesting
yes strangely enough i'm actually
looking forward to that because i've
been
i've been feeling a lot better recently
and so it'd be actually nice to
have a conversation with a journalist
when i wasn't feeling half
dead and to see how that goes so
um it'd be nice to have a conversation
at one point when i was at the top of my
game
and so i don't know if i'm at the top of
my game right now but i am definitely
feeling a lot better than i have for a
long time
so um yeah yeah thank god for that man
it's uh hopefully that will be reflected
in some reasonable quality of discourse
tonight
and perhaps a tiny bit of wit but we'll
see how that goes
um so
so uh when i step into an
old school television studio it feels
like 1975
in some sense you know the person i'm
talking to
isn't really there they're really a
speaking device for the corporation
and and they have to be because the
corporation which is running
high band you know high expense
low bandwidth television where every
minute or every second is
extraordinarily expensive they can't
really take risks they can't have
free-flowing conversations on the off
chance that something goes dreadfully
wrong
and it might right and and so everything
is scripted and then
you know you have 30 seconds to make
your point and like there's just some
things you can't say
in 30 seconds you know you have to you
have to compress them down to the point
where
they actually they're actually foolish
it's actually foolish to try to do it
but
you know what else do you have whereas
with these long-form conversations
man you can actually have a discussion
about something you can try to get to
the bottom of it
and so that's that's pretty cool and
then and then it turns out that people
will actually follow along like i was
actually
absolutely stunned by i had four debates
with sam harris
earlier this year uh two in vancouver
and one in dublin and one in london
and each of them lasted about three
hours and we were going to do a q a for
each of them but
as it turned out while we were talking
we got into the conversation and then we
asked the audience to vote by clapping
whether we should continue the
conversation
or move to the q a and it was
overwhelming majority of people wanted
the conversation to continue and so
basically
what happened was something
approximating a 12 to 15-hour
continuous conversation
about the relationship between facts and
values or science and religion you know
and
that's a fairly solid philosophical
discussion and that isn't
necessarily the case that sam and i are
the two people in the world who would be
most qualified to undertake such a
discussion
but you know we did our best and it was
a pretty high level
conversation i mean for me it was
approximately the level i think that
would
characterize a pretty decent phd
dissertation
defense and that's fairly high level
intellectual
conversation and the audience was just
with us the entire time and so
that's cool man you know it it it could
easily be that our
relatively primitive initial
mass communication technologies like
television
made us look a lot stupider even to
ourselves than we actually were because
everything had to be compressed to a
very short period of time
everything had to be scripted so it
couldn't be spontaneous discussion
you couldn't assume that your audience
knew anything
because maybe it was the first time they
watched the show you couldn't assume
that they remembered anything because
you didn't know
like if it was a series whether they had
participated in the entire series
you had to aim at the lowest common
denominator and you couldn't assume much
of an attention span
but it turns out that people have an
incredible attention span
you know like i was just re-watching
breaking bad and i don't know how many
hours
breaking bad is it's like what this six
seasons must must be 60 hours i think
something like that and
it's so really it's a continuous 60-hour
movie and that's a long movie and it's
really engrossing and
and there's all sorts of other shows
that are perhaps of equal complexity and
man
people have no problem with them at all
right they just eat them up so
it turns out that well it turns out
maybe we're not so stupid
and so that'd be nice if it if if we
weren't so stupid and
i'm i'm kind of tired of everyone
assuming that we are
just like i'm tired of everyone assuming
that we're some sort of cancer
on the planet you know i don't i don't
like that
attitude about human beings i think it's
i think there's something
deeply deeply wrong about it you know
this is something something that's just
kind of an interesting historical tidbit
back in the late 1800s there was a
biologist named thomas huxley
and he was the famous novelist elvis
huxley's i think great grandfather
perhaps grandfather and a very
intelligent man that a very
very uh gifted family
and uh huxley was a great defender of
darwin by the way too and
he was commissioned by the english
government
to do a study of oceanic resources
this was back in the 1890s and because
the english at that point were
concerned to some degree that you know
maybe it would be possible that we would
overfish and and cause trouble because
of that and huxley
did an exhaustive study and he concluded
that
there were so there's so much ocean and
there's so
much resource in the ocean that there
wasn't a possibility that
human beings with their rather puny
technologies could ever do anything but
put a small
dent in the absolute overwhelming
plenitude of the
of the of of the of the of the
water that covers more than half the
planet and so that's only 130 years ago
there abouts that's that's not that long
you know that's two relatively old men
ago
it's not that long and you know you have
put them back to back sort of
um and so that that's yesterday in some
sense and
it really wasn't at all until the 1960s
that we had some sense that
we had developed technologically to the
point where
some of what we could do mechanically
might start to have planetary
repercussions say with you know we
we saw that with air quality in cities
for example and and
the denuding of of of the countryside
and
and then perhaps the overfishing in
relationship to the oceans which started
to happen after world war ii but
nobody had any sense really until 1960
that well maybe we had to take care of
things a little bit
better than we were because there was
more of us
we were starting to become a force that
was to some degree a
match for nature you know and and bloody
well thank god for that you know because
nature was more than a match for us for
a very long period of time right
our our species has come up through
through through epochs eons of
absolute brutal um privation
and difficulty and and starvation and
and freezing temperatures and and
burning in the desert sun and
lack of water and lack of of hygienic
facilities and like just hand-to-mouth
suffering and you know we've managed to
organize ourselves to the point where
that's still the lot of a substantial
number of people on the planet but
that's decreasing
very rapidly you know the u.n now
projects that by the year 2030
abject poverty which is defined as
living on less than a dollar a 90
90 a day in in today's u.s money will be
eradicated there won't be anybody in the
world that poor and
the cynics say well that's a pretty damn
low
uh barrier let's say but
if you double it you also see that's
decreasing very rapidly and if you
triple it you see that's decreasing very
rapidly and
you've got to draw the bloody line
somewhere you know and abject poverty is
abject poverty and the fact that
it's decreased by 50 percent in the last
12 years from 2000 to the year 2012
we've decreased the absolute level of
abject poverty in the world by 50
percent
right it was the fastest economic
it was the most spectacular economic
miracle in the history of
humankind and you know you hardly ever
hear about it hardly anyone knows about
it it's like
it's it's a bloody miracle there's more
middle-class people in the world now
than non-middle-class people
and there are way more obese people than
there are starving people
and so that's something to celebrate you
know i mean it's a
funny thing to celebrate but but it's a
it's a
it's quite the thing to celebrate and
the fastest growing economies in the
world are in sub-saharan africa
and and they're growing at five to seven
percent a year so it looks like the
economic miracle that's
you know that took place in india and in
china most of southeast asia
is really starting to kick in in africa
and it seems at least in part it's
because of the
collapse of the soviet union back in
and the lack of overt
pressure to have african countries
pursue the most
pathological possible economic doctrines
that anybody could ever
imagine they just stopped doing that has
freed people up to start to become
well if not rich at least richer and at
least with the possibility of
a continual rise upward you know the
child mortality rate in africa now
is the same as it was in europe in 1952.
i mean that's that's really something
you know and and
uh um longevity rates have
increased tremendously in africa and
you know we're kicking the slats out of
some major diseases
polio is pretty much gone it looks like
we're putting a pretty good dent in
malaria
that'll do great things for africa i
think there's a real possibility with
some concerted effort that we could get
rid of tuberculosis in the
next 15 years or so if we made that a
target that would be something
you know that's an ancient scourge of
mankind we could certainly do without
that
so there and and there are intelligent
people who are working hard on
trying to eradicate these problems and
they're doing it successfully
and so you know i'm i'm not i'm not
in favor of the whole there's something
wrong with humanity
and we're a scourge on the bloody planet
and it would be better off if there were
fewer of us
and the whole planet would be thriving
if there were none of us at all i think
that there's something
unbelievably dangerous about that
attitude and i think it's
it's ungrateful and unfair and
unsympathetic
and ungrateful and non-em empathetic
because i really do
see that like i know i don't know a lot
about human history because god there's
a lot of history to know about you know
and
the more you know about human history
the more you know that
there's just endless details that you
have no idea about but
if you if you do a reasonable overview
you you do
see that it's it's a bloody mess you
know that it's it's
it's privation and war and catastrophe
and brutality and
struggle and and strife and difficulty
all the entire way through you know
people
striving against odds that are just
absolutely
astronomic astronomical and yet
succeeding you know that
overall the the story overall is one of
i wouldn't say unbroken progress but
it's decent progress and it's better now
than it's ever been by a huge margin
and there's every bit of evidence to
suggest that
it could continue to get better and
better and better you know here's
another thing that's really cool
do you know that we're adding four years
of life expectancy
every year now so once we hit a year
every year then that's it we don't die
anymore but
those last eight months a year they're
gonna be they're gonna be tough to
manage you know
but four months a year is really
something and so
you know we're basically living longer
and we're living healthier and we're
smarter than we were because we're much
more
our nutritional levels are higher than
they were because because we're not
starving
especially the people at the bottom end
and
you know we're educating people all over
the world the chinese graduate
more engineers every year than the us
have
engineers now that's terrifying because
god
always we've got all these engineers
already and they're making
gadgets at such a rate that you can't
even keep track of the gadgets right
you go online and like there's all these
technologies
and all these subcultures using them and
you don't even know what the
technologies are
if you're fully informed
you can't keep up with the new stuff
that you might
buy and it's not like it's trivial
technology it's unbelievably powerful
technology like
i'm in awe of many of the young people
that i work with because
they're more comp they're they're
savvier about the
technological infrastructure that
constitutes the web than i
am because i'm old and it and it's hard
to keep up as you get old
um and you know they come up with tools
to make
difficult things very simple very
rapidly and
there's just subcultures everywhere that
are doing this at an
unbelievably rapid rate you know when
you go to somewhere like silicon valley
and i've spent a lot of time in silicon
valley and
it's it has its problems but jesus
there's a
unbelievable collection of smart people
there and
they're working on things like they're
working on things like mad
and and and it's working you know you
see someone like elon musk i mean
what the hell do you make of someone
like that you know i mean
what did he do he made an electric car
which is basically impossible
and it works which is basically
impossible and then he built an
infrastructure
so that you could charge the damn thing
wherever you drove and
that was basically impossible and then
he made it cheap
because if you buy an electric car and
you factor in the price of gas the
electric car is actually
about as expensive as the gasoline car
and so that was unbelievable
then he built a bloody rocket which was
one tenth the price or less
that of a nasa rocket that you could
reuse
which was impossible and then he put one
of his cars on top of the rocket
and he shot it up into space and then
this happened
right this all happened and he's still
alive and
you know and then he went and blew it
all by smoking pot on joe rogan you know
because
because well it's so funny you know we
you know we like our insane geniuses
like predictable and
and and and safe and so we don't want
them doing strange things like having a
tiny puff of marijuana
on a show famous for marijuana so
so anyways you know that's all that's
all good news it's
all good news man and i learned a lot
about this i worked for the u.n
for a while like indirectly and
and i wasn't paid for it by the way it
was volunteer work
i worked on this
document which was the report to the
secretary general on sustainable
economic development it's quite
funny because a lot of the right wing
conspiracy theorists are having a
field day with that man that i'm some
sort of like
closet globalist chill because i
because i work momentarily for the u.n
it's like well what what the hell are
you supposed to do when you're asked to
do something like that you know there
was a document that was being prepared
that was
supposed to lay out some halfways
intelligent
vision of what things might be like if
the international community cooperated
for the next 30 years it wasn't
it wasn't like there weren't brutal
guidelines that were going to be
enforced by
jack-booted nazis it was it was just a
proposal paper and
so we had a chance to to to work on it
there was only one canadian team and i
got i got placed on that and that was
kind of cool and
so it gave me an opportunity to spend
two years
reading about economics and about
ecology at the same time and so and
what was so weird about that was the
more i read the more optimistic i got
and i thought well that isn't what i
expected like i thought we were going to
hell in a hand basket at quite the quite
the rapid rate
and you know i mean there's no doubt
that we're doing some stupid things and
i would say the stupidest thing we're
probably doing
is overfishing the oceans because
there's just no use
it's just there's just no use in that
it's it's completely destructive it
doesn't do anybody
any good and it could be stopped but i
know that your country for example is
starting to put aside
marine park reserves that are fishery
free essentially and
you don't need a lot of that before the
ocean can regenerate itself because it's
actually pretty good at that
um one of the things that's kind of
funny you know remember when that
when there was that big oil spill in the
gulf of mexico you know there were more
fish there two years later than there
were before the spill
you know why because people stopped
fishing
so it turned out that the pollution was
really good for the fish
it's like
yeah well that's why you have to do your
research carefully because you never
know you know you never know what's true
and what isn't and so that was
that was pretty interesting the same
thing happened in world war ii by the
way
in in the north sea because the north
sea had been fished out pretty badly and
then
during world war ii it wasn't all that
safe to go out and fish
in the north sea because you know you
would get sunk by a submarine and that
was not very bright
so people stopped fishing and the fish
came back very rapidly and
fish do that because they breed quite
quickly and so if you just leave the
damn things alone for a while
most of them come back but
but you know apart from the fisheries
which which is
is really quite an appalling and and and
pessimistic story although not hopeless
um and people are waking up to it and
and building these marine reserve parks
for example
a lot of the ecological news was
surprisingly good
way better than i thought it would be uh
you know so for example
there are more forests in the northern
hemisphere than there were a hundred
years ago
so who would have guessed that i
wouldn't have guessed that
partly it's because marginal farmland
has returned to forest
so and because we've got more effective
at at um
at agriculture by a huge margin and uh
there are more forests in china than
there were 30 years ago
and so that's something and it turns out
when people burn coal which is
you know kind of polluting they don't
burn wood
so you know they're going to burn
something because they don't like
eating raw inedible things and freezing
to death
so they're going to burn something and
it turns out that coal is actually
preferable to wood and so well and so
these things are complicated and the
the ecological story looked
better than than i would have ever
guessed
even the overpopulation issue you know
ever since the 1960s
with paul ehrlich and the population
bomb there was this terrible
pessimism that we were going to breed
you know like
like uncontrolled rats until every
square inch of the
world was like covered with with some
starving skeleton
and that that was all going to happen by
the year 2000 when there would be mass
starvation and
the the price of commodities would have
blown through the roof when we would run
out of oil and
and all the uh all the
commodities that we need to maintain a
reasonably standard
reasonably high standard of living and
you know that didn't happen
and not only did it happen is that rates
of poverty went down and
rates of hunger went down even though
the population went way
up and so there are more people who are
hungry now than there were 50 years ago
but there are far fewer proportion of
people who are hungry
and that's really something and so the
overpopulation doom and gloomers were
absolutely wrong
wrong wrong wrong and
we're going to peak at 9 billion that's
what it looks like all the projections
indicate something around 9 billion and
that's only 2 billion more than we have
like it's not nothing it's still two
billion people but
we're but at the rate at which we're
improving agricultural
output and with regards to efficiency of
agricultural output
there's no evidence whatsoever that
we're going to run out of food and
you know a country like uganda this is
quite interesting if
uganda which is a very big country by
the way if it was utilized properly it
has a water table underneath it and
plenty of water
if uganda was utilized properly it could
feed all of
africa and so it's not like we're making
full use even of the
um agricultural capacity that we have
available to us
and so there's no we're not going to
overpopulate the world and leave
everybody
like starving in on on like easter
island with nothing but
giant heads and no trees that's not
going to happen
and in fact i have a sneaking suspicion
that within 100 years
one of the biggest problems that we'll
be facing is a declining population
and that that'll be worrisome i mean we
won't be concerned about that at the
moment but
um that whole doom and gloom scenario
just seems to be
to be wrong and you know there are there
are fewer wars than there were
by a large margin the overall rates of
homicidal behavior in the world have
plummeted
the rates of death by terrorism over the
last 50 years have plummeted
um there's
there's a lot of good news there's way
more good news than there is bad news
and that's there's no wars in the
western hemisphere there's a piece of
good news
you know that's a remarkable thing so
and
you know and it's been it's been 70
years since world war ii and we've had
thermonuclear weapons since then and
of course everyone's terrified of those
bloody things and and no wonder and
maybe that's for the best because we
maybe we needed something to really
terrify us you know it's certainly
possible but
even though there's always the
possibility of a mistake and there's
still the possibility of a nuclear
outbreak we haven't used them and we
haven't had a third world war and
almost all of us here have lived in what
you got
to think man comparative peace and
prosperity if you compare it to
any other time and place anywhere else
in the world
at any point in history which is not
perfect because you know you're still
getting old and you're still gonna die
and and we haven't we haven't
what we haven't defeated all the
diseases that that beset us but
god it could be a lot worse and we seem
to be making it a lot better
and so and so look this is what happened
to me you know
when i wrote my first book which was
maps of meaning um
i was looking at something that was
really dark it was really dark
i i was interested in totalitarianism
and i'm still interested in
totalitarianism i don't care if it's
what
on whether it's on the left or the right
it doesn't matter to me
it's this it's this totalizing view
that's predicated on the assumption that
you can take a set
of a few simple axioms about the way the
world
is and always was and then you can
decide how society
would be structured and then you can
force people into acting that way
and the utopia will come i'm not fond of
that
sort of thinking i don't think there's
any evidence that it's
viable partly because the world's too
complicated to manage that and
you just can't get your axioms right and
besides
things shift around on you and even if
you're right today
something's going to turn on you
tomorrow and you're going to have to
update your model a bit
and if you don't well then all hell is
going to break loose so
but you know i was interested in
totalitarianism
partly because because for psychological
reasons i was interested in why
people were so committed to belief
systems that they were willing to
put everything to the torch essentially
so
mostly i was concerned about the
ideological struggle between the western
world and the communist world
particularly the soviets but not only
the soviets
um and and i was curious in a sort of
post-modern way because
you know you might say well you know the
marxists they have their viewpoint and
you know inequality of income
distribution is a problem and maybe
things should be fairer and
maybe the fact that there are relatively
poor people in the west and relatively
rich people in the west is a consequence
of oppression and maybe something could
be done about that
and the western way of looking at the
world is just an arbitrary set of rules
and
the communist way of looking at the
world is another arbitrary set of rules
maybe you could even say that about the
fascist way of looking at the world
although somehow people are much
less likely to agree to that which is
quite interesting because it
it means that by and large we have
come to a collective decision that there
are some forms of arbitrary games let's
say
set up on axiomatic structure that are
wrong
you know and it's a very rare person who
thinks that what the nazis did
was was justifiable was right in any in
any
fundamental sense and that's interesting
you know because it means that
collectively we have come
to a decision that there is a difference
between good and evil
if you assume that what the nazis did
was evil which i think is a
fairly reasonable assumption i don't i
don't know what you would do with the
word evil if
what happened in places like auschwitz
didn't deserve that
epithet you need some other word that
was just as dark to describe
what happened so you might as well just
use evil because
everybody knows what it means so we have
come to a conclusion that
there are things that we shouldn't get
up to you know and that also implies
that we've come to some conclusion about
what constitutes good
some general sense that
whatever the opposite of what let's say
the nazis did and i would say also the
collectivist communists
whatever the opposite of that is
whatever that might be
that's good and that we should be
pursuing that and so that's a good thing
because it kind of pulls us out of the
moral relativistic problem
not not exactly because it's not defined
perfectly or anything
you know to say well you shouldn't be a
nazi it's like
it's kind of vague you know okay no
armbands
no no goose stepping um but but then
what
well that's that's a complic it's a
complicated question
to figure out how to conduct yourself so
that you would be
unlikely to participate in the horrors
of a totalitarian ideological system if
the advantages of doing so were offered
to you in a realistic way
that's really the moral issue because
you know if you read about
nazi germany and you read about
communist
soviet union and china you understand
that
those systems were very attractive to
people
and there were reasons for that
attractiveness and that
had you been there there's a high
probability
that you would have been attracted by
those ideas
and you can see that now because there's
a big resurgence
for example both on the left on the on
the right but i would say primarily on
the left especially in
the academic world there's a big
resurgence in the same kind of ideas
that
that uh inspire generations of
of soviet utopians say back in
in in the in the early 1900s
when they had not so much evidence that
what they were doing was absolutely
bloody pointless and murderous you know
and so that does separate the modern
people who suggest that such things from
those who believed it 100 years ago but
nonetheless you know the point is is
that those ideas are so attractive that
they still they still resonate with
people
and you have to take that seriously
because it means they probably resonate
with you and
some of it is i deal with this to some
degree in chapter one
stand up straight with your shoulders
back
because it really is a discussion of
hierarchies
and i actually try to make a case like i
like to make a case for hierarchy
you know the the radical leftist types
uh the post-modernist in particular and
i put this
mostly at the feet of people like
foucault he'd be he'd be villain number
one
although he was influenced heavily by
marx and his own
special sense of resentment intellectual
resentment and arrogance
so which which which made him into a
sort of perverted
and malevolent and underhanded marks
which is
really something to be because just the
ordinary marks wasn't so great
um you know and and foucault makes this
fundamental case that
human that there's no real truth and
that
what passes is truth is the dominant
opinion of the dominant group and
by dominant he means those that hold the
power
and and so that's a hell of a
pessimistic
view of the world and it's wrong
it's wrong and like it's seriously wrong
um and and i'm gonna i'm gonna
lay out why it's wrong i mean first of
all it doesn't even work for kids
you know if you look at how kids
organize themselves on the playground
there are bullies and it's interesting
if you study
bullies you find out that they're not
necessarily the most
unpopular kids there are outcast
kids who are more unpopular than the
bullies
and the bullies are ambivalently popular
they have some friends and they have
some enemies
so you know so it's not entirely
counterproductive to be a bully but it
starts working
it starts working less and less well as
you get older and so it's it's not doing
so well by the time you hit junior high
and by the time you're at high school
it's not a very effective strategy at
all
and a bully is someone who uses power
it's like
bloody well do what i want or i'll hit
you
or i'll do something else that you won't
like that will be physical or maybe
it'll be psychological
but if the psychology doesn't work
calling you names
demeaning you you know talking behind
your back which is
very common form of female bullying
because females have their own forms of
bullying and they're very effective
you know if that doesn't work then i can
just take you out of the schoolyard and
pound you and if i can't pound you
myself well then i'll pound you with one
of my friends and that'll be just as
effective and
you'll bloody well do what i want you to
do and that's
power and it's like
really that's the basis of our society
that's
that sort of power that's how we
organize ourselves
i mean it's it's patently ridiculous
first of all
most children who are popular let's say
universally popular and who do well
socially
aren't bullies they're good at playing
with others
and they learn that between the age of
two and four and they learn very
straightforward rules like
reciprocity that's the big one it's
there's a couple reciprocity is one
trust is another
to to abide by your word but those are
the same things reciprocity and trust
are very similar it's like
well you know we'll take turns you play
my game now and i'll play your game
tomorrow you know and you guys have had
friends that were real friends and you
know perfectly well that if you have a
good friend
you don't have to keep track exactly of
what you do for each other
you don't write it down on a piece of
paper and you know put a check mark
beside it unless you're unless you're a
little bit on the paranoid side
and and and and that's only the
beginnings of your problems
and what you do is you know you kind of
keep track of who does what for
who and you kind of keep the balance
equal
and you do that because well that's what
you do if you're awake and conscious and
a decent person and
if you have a relationship if you're in
a marriage it's the same thing
you know it's like you don't obsessively
keep track of who owes
what when and why that that's a sign of
a degenerating relationship what you do
is
well you do what you can for your
partner and they do what
they can for you and you're both aware
of that and
you assume good will and with any luck
that iterates across
time and it's a sustainable game it's
not bloody power
and you know you know there's nothing
more miserable than being in a
relationship where
where the rule is do what the hell i
want or suffer the consequences
you know and what kind of relationship
are you going to get out of that even if
the person is
proud enough to do what you want them to
do
when you're there and enforcing it
they're not going to put their whole
heart into it
that's bloody well for sure they're
going to be if they have any sense at
all and they do and if they have any
spirit at all and they do they're going
to be undermining
what you're forcing them to do all the
time there's an old soviet joke
they pretend to pay us and
we pretend to work
right great that's a hell of a way to
run a society
and and and and that's exactly how that
society ran so all you do with force is
engender
bitterness and resentment and if the
person
that you're that you're exerting force
on
can't exert the same level of physical
force back
it's not like they're not going to take
their revenge in other ways
they're not going to cook you wonderful
meals they're not going to be
what would you call it enthusiastic
sexual partners
you know they're going to get their
revenge when they can unless you've
crushed their spirit completely
and then then it serves you right
because then you're dragging around
behind you
someone whose spirit you've crushed
completely
and that's a hell of a way to live and
so what is this idea that our society is
fundamentally predicated on
power you know and then that's the
post-modern claim we
group ourselves into our groups whatever
the hell they happen to be
sex gender ethnicity whatever the flavor
of the month is there's an
infinite number of ways we could group
ourselves and then we organize ourselves
into power hierarchies and we
dominate each other and then all of
those groups go to war against one
another
and the most dominant group that has the
most power
wins it's like i don't know what what
the hell planet
foucault grew up on you know that that
might be the definition of like
the worst african dictatorship of the
last
100 years but it's not a description of
our society
and it's not a description of the way
that people organize themselves into
hierarchies which was the point i was
trying to make in
rule one when i talked about hierarchies
now
it's very important where you are in
your hierarchical position
with regards to other people in
relationship to your mental health
and this is a really important thing to
understand because you have an ancient
counter in your brain and that was the
point of the biological
uh comparisons and lobsters being one
set of comparisons but not only lobsters
we know perfectly well animal
behaviorists people
who know their neural psychopharmacology
know perfectly well that
the serotonin serotonergic system
operates quite
similarly across most animals with
complex nervous systems and one of the
things that it does
is track relative status position
and in in birds wrens which is another
example i used
a lot of it is power you know ren's a
little bird it's quite a cute bird it
sings very nicely and
you you think it's harmless but but it's
not it's a vicious little character and
i used to sit in my backyard and record
ren's songs on my
on my tape recorder and the wren that
lived in our backyard would dive bomb it
you know
four inches away and it was very brave
of him and
he had a little nest that that was up in
the tree and there were some nests
that we had built bird houses in in the
neighborhoods nearby and then
in the yards nearby and he would go like
half he's half his day spent
stuffing those other birdhouses with
sticks
so full that no bird could get in them
you know it was like this is my damn
yard which is what he was saying when he
was singing so beautifully
and you better look the hell out because
if you build i'm going to
stuff your damn house with sticks and if
i see you sitting on a branch i'm going
to
dive bomb you and knock you off and
that's
power and that's what wren's do despite
the fact that they're cute
and chickens do the same thing there are
pecking orders among chickens and
virtually every animal wolf packs
organize themselves into hierarchies and
chimpanzees organize themselves into
hierarchies and
like there are rat hierarchies and
hierarchical
organization is the rule among animals
that live
somewhat socially and even those who
don't
that occupy the same geographical
territory there has to be some way
of organizing access to relatively
scarce resources
that doesn't result in chronic combat
because chronic combat well look you're
ren
a and you're rent b and you decide to
have it out so you peck yourselves half
to death and
you're rent c and so you got a little
bit more patience you just wait until
those two wrens beat each other to death
and then you move in it's like it's a
stupid solution
it doesn't even work for ren's let alone
people and so you know the wrens
announced their prowess and they do that
with the quality of their song and
their displays and and they they
indicate
to one another who shouldn't be messed
with
and then there's a minimum of combat and
you could make
a pretty good case that that's power
that that's power
but like it's not like wrens get
together and build
like rent apartment houses and then and
then go out on collective
worm hunt insects i guess collective
insect hunting expeditions and bring
them all back and distribute them
or or or or make insect farms so that
there's more insects for all the wrens
they haven't got that far you know
they're competing in a zero-sum
game and that isn't what human beings do
we figured out how to not have zero-sum
games
a very very long time ago and it turns
out that if the game you're playing
isn't zero
sum right which means that there's only
a finite number of resources and
everybody has to fight to the death for
them
and some are going to get the lion's
share and others are going to starve
if you're not playing a zero-sum game
then you can learn to cooperate
and compete in an intelligent civilized
manner
and all of a sudden there's more than
enough for everyone
now still some people are going to have
more than other
others you know and but there's nothing
how are you going to stop
that and do you want to like do you want
to only know what
do you want you want to only be allowed
to know what everyone else knows you
don't get to know anything that no one
that anyone else knows
because it's got to be equal you want
everyone to be exactly the same amount
of attractive
you know which and if you averaged
attractiveness overall and you only
allowed each person to be as attractive
as the average person
there'd be not much attractiveness left
in the world and it seems to me that
that would be quite the loss you know
and
strength you're not allowed to have any
additional strength or
or or ambition or talent or
or act or or let's say athletic ability
it's like or artistic ability i mean
aren't we kind of happy that
there's massive inequality in the
distribution of talent
i know it's it's i know it's harsh and
hard but
you can't expect everybody to have every
talent that there is
and it would be a hell of a sacrifice if
no one got to have any talent because it
wouldn't be
fair and so i don't get the whole
equality of outcome
thing it isn't it isn't going to work
there aren't that many geniuses you know
we want to exploit the geniuses and get
them to work for us
and if the if if the price is is that
somebody has
more than you do of something well
suck it up for christ's sake well jesus
seriously man it's like
look how much more do you have
than most people have you know you you
need you need to make thirty thousand
dollars a year to be in the top one
percent of the socioeconomic
distribution worldwide you know you
always hear about the one percent
right of the evil one percent and they
churn by the way because it's not the
same people all the time
it's like all of you here are in the
evil one percent
and you think well that's not very fair
because i was really only talking about
within my country
my well that's convenient for you you
know or
it makes it really really convenient
argument for you it's like well all
those other people
those foreigners they don't count if
they're poor who the hell cares
it's it's it's it's the australians that
matter
you know and so no that's that's that's
a non-starter
you know and and by historical standards
you're doing a hell of a lot better than
the top one percent i can tell you that
i read a nice article by
a coalition called human progress the
other day and they were comparing
the typical middle class person who
lives now
with uh rockefellers in the 1990s
and say well would you rather be a
middle class person now or nelson
rockefeller in 1919
and the answer seemed pretty damn clear
that
well you know if you were nelson
rockefeller then you would have been
richer than anyone
else and there's something to be said
for that status right because people do
like to have more than others it's a
it's a i don't know if it's a good thing
or not but it is one of the things that
we like
and so you'd have that you'd be richer
than everyone else but there'd be all
sorts of things that you have that
now that nelson rockefeller wouldn't
have had
a hope of purchasing like the
antibiotics that he would have needed to
stop his son from dying
for example you know just as a start
and so so i think
this this this this complaint about
inequality
look no one likes inequality exactly you
walk down the street this is why
i always get a kick out of people who
protest i'm against
poverty it's like
really you're against
poverty and and you think that's a
unique enough
attribute so that it was worth your time
to
make a sign that said that you were
against poverty
and show other people it's like
i've never met i've never met anyone
that was for
poverty you know you walk down the
street with someone who's pretty well
off you know and they've got 1920s spats
on and a bowler
and they're feeling pretty damn rich and
the stalkster certificate sticking out
of their back pocket
and you know there's a homeless person
there and they give them a good
kick and they say the more poverty the
better
it's like no you know when people walk
down the street and you see homeless
people
and they're often homeless is a complex
problem like you think well
homeless people are poor it's like yeah
yeah man
that's like one problem they have out of
50.
and like i've worked with poor people
you know in my clinical practice and
pour in multiple dimensions and many of
them you gave them money they were just
done especially if they were like
alcoholics and cocaine addicts as long
as they were
broke they had some hope of living
through the next
month but as soon as their unemployment
check showed up man they were face down
in the ditch
three days later right nothing but
cocaine and alcohol with all their idiot
friends for three days
and then they'd show up back in my
practice saying you know god i relapsed
again
well what happened well my money came in
it's like yeah
money's really going to do you a hell of
a lot of good it'll just kill you faster
than poverty
now not that there's anything good about
poverty but it's not like these are
simple problems you walk down the street
and you see someone who's
been an alcoholic for 20 years and maybe
they're addicted to methamphetamines as
well
or maybe they're schizophrenic it's like
it isn't
unequal distribution of monetary
resources
that are is the primary cause for that
problem and it isn't going to be some
sort of straightforward redistribution
that's going to fix it because it's way
more complicated than that
and so and then the whole power thing
too it's like
look i get it i get the left wing i get
the left wing issue and i really do and
i think i get it better than the damn
left wingers get it
because you know most of the radical
types they follow marks and they say
well
one of marx's dictums was that capital
tended to accumulate in the hands of
fewer and fewer people
and that's right that's true wealth
and capital income for that matter but
not only that
whatever it is that you might like to
have accumulates in the hands of smaller
and smaller numbers of people it's a
principle that was discovered by an
economist named
pareto vilfredo pareto and he pointed
out
something that had been pointed out in
the gospels by the way thousands of
years earlier which was
to those who have everything more will
be given and from those who have nothing
everything will be taken away the rule
being
once you start to succeed at something
the probability that you will continue
to succeed ever more rapidly increases
so there's exp there's an exponential
function
with regards to success but there's also
an exponential function with regards to
failure
so failure and and success aren't like
this
they're like this fail fail die succeed
succeed
succeed ridiculously like it's this
weird curve and
and it's funny because it doesn't just
characterize economics it's
it's a really fun it looks like a really
fundamental economic law i was actually
quite shocked when i first learned about
this which was only about 15 years ago
because
i thought most things were normally
distributed it turns out that that's not
true
what people produce creatively isn't
normally distributed a small proportion
of people produce
most of what's of value it doesn't
matter what it is
and you know this it's like
how many books does stephen king sell
it's like half the books right
and then there's the next guy after
stephen king and no one even knows who
he is
and he sells like one-tenth as many
books as stephen king
and then there's author number 50 and
out of the thousands and thousands of
offers and he's
barely scraping by and then there's the
bottom 99.9 percent and
they can't make a living writing and
that's how it is and it's the same with
musicians
and it's the same with with with
athletes you know if
you look at number of goals scored for
example in hockey i'm a canadian so i'll
use that
there's a small percentage of absolutely
phenomenal
hockey players even in something as
amazing as the national hockey league or
any professional sports league you know
you
you have to be one hell of an athlete to
make it in a professional sports league
and still you get this tiny group of
superstars
who are way better at it than anyone
else you know and
and so there's this weird rule that as
you get more
getting even more gets easier and who
knows why it is exactly partly it's
practice but and it characterizes
all sorts of situations like it
characterizes the size of
planets a small number of planets have
almost all the mass
it characterizes stars the same way it
characterizes
biomass in the in the in the uh
amazon jungle it characterizes city size
a small percentage of cities have almost
all the people
it's like what what's that and then then
you go back 10 000 years you look at a
paleolithic grave site
and you see what people are buried with
and like there's one guy there's two
guys there is this covered with gold
right
the gravesite is insanely rich and
everyone else has like
a bone and it's theirs and that's it you
know
and and so you analyze paleolithic
gravesites you see exactly the same
pareto distribution
a small number of people are buried with
all the wealth
and almost everyone else has none and so
it's this unbelievably deep proclivity
of resources to distribute themselves
unequally
and you know this too because you play
games like monopoly
right you've all played monopoly what
happens when you play monopoly
you all start out equal right exactly
equal and you all have an equal chance
of winning because it's basically a game
of chance
not entirely because you can play
stupidly but
you know but but you can only play so
intelligently because you're at the
mercy of the dice and what happens
inevitably is that
some evil capitalist ends up with
all the money and all the hotels and all
the houses and just
like takes you out and yet you play
and you don't think oh my god you know
there's something fundamentally unfair
about that
or maybe you play non-competitive
monopoly where
after every round you redistribute the
money
so everyone
right so there's no fun in that and so
and so the
so the problem with karl marx as far as
i'm concerned is that he was nowhere
pessimistic enough
it's like no you can't blame inequality
on capitalism
in fact capitalism is pretty good at
ameliorating inequality
like there's still plenty of inequality
in capitalist societies make no mistake
about that and
you can make some claim although it's a
tricky one that
some indices of inequality have
increased over the last 20 years it
depends on how you measure it because
it's complicated because you know
even poorer people now have access to
well let's say
iphones which have more computational
power than
the entire system that put the apollo 11
on the moon
which is you know for six hundred
dollars which isn't a bad bargain
so so it's not that easy it's not that
easy to do those economic calculations
but one of the things you can say about
capitalism and about private property
and about the idea that people have
a right to what they earn and a right to
what they own is that
it's pretty damn good at generating
wealth
and the wealth isn't equally distributed
by any stretch of the imagination but
a fair bit of it goes to the bottom and
that's why we're seeing well
a relative dearth of of tremendous
deprivation
and you might say well we want to
squeeze out that last bit of inequality
and it's like
well maybe we do and maybe we don't it's
not so obvious
first of all because even if we did want
to we don't know how
and we certainly do know that if there
are some ways
that if we go about it then things
really go to hell in a hand basket
really fast
and everyone ends up equal because
they're all starving and dead
you end up in a situation like venezuela
not that they're all starving and dead
but the average venezuelan lost 17
pounds in the last year
and that wasn't from voluntary diet
right
and that's a very rich country and so we
do know that there are ways
of ameliorating inequality that just
don't work
and so it's a dangerous thing to mess
with because we don't understand it
now you know that doesn't mean we
shouldn't try to understand it
and that also doesn't mean that the left
doesn't have a point you know
if if your society becomes too unequal
and too many people stack up at the
bottom
and they don't have an opportunity to
move forward that seems like it's bad
for everyone
and so we could we could agree on that
and we could try to set up our
hierarchies
so that they're not too brutal for the
people who end up at the bottom right
that would be nice if we could be
sensible and
figure out how to do that but i think
we're not doing that bad job of figuring
out how to do it
we build infrastructure that everybody
can use we have universal education
systems and so on and they're not
perfect but
they're they're far from um they're far
from
catastrophic and they're a hell of a lot
better than they were a hundred years
ago
so we are making some progress on that i
think the problem with the radical
leftists is that they don't take the
problem of inequality seriously enough
they blame it on capitalism it's like
sorry
that's wrong it's a way deeper problem
it wasn't capitalism that produced
inequality of
gravesite wealth distribution in
paleolithic europe
10 000 years ago and it's not capitalism
that makes
some stars have all the mass right
it's a different order of problem and so
we have to be more sophisticated than
economists were
150 years ago when we talk about
inequality and when we talk about
hierarchy
we also have to be more sophisticated
because we have to start to understand
what it means for there to be a human
hierarchy
and and and the basis upon which
hierarchies actually establish
themselves if they're going to be
playable iterable civilized productive
sustainable um uh what
voluntary that's an important one what
what are the characteristics of such
things
and i think that if we use a little bit
of sense
we can figure that out too and i like to
use the example of plumbers
because i actually happen to like
plumbers uh partly because i don't like
it when my basement is full of sewage
and that's happened once or twice and oh
you call a plumber and
then that doesn't happen and i'm i'm i'm
pleased about that
like i'm sure most of you are you know
and plumbers have done an awful lot for
the world
and there's a big difference between a
good plumber and a bad plumber
i've had two bad plumbers and the first
bad plumber
was in montreal and my tap was leaking a
little bit
and so he came in to fix it and i don't
know what the hell he was doing but he
was using a torch
and he was burning something maybe
taking some solder off some pipes
underneath the
the sink but he lit the wall on fire
which
wasn't helpful because the wall wasn't
on fire before he showed up
and so and then and then he forgot to
shut the water off at the main pipe when
he took the
tap apart and so then apart from the
fact that my wall was charred my
bathroom was completely covered with
water and then he sort of panicked and
he put the thing back together the tap
back together with the
with the with the washer which was now
extraordinarily damaged
and he shut it off and he turned he had
figured out to turn the water off at the
main
valve by then and he turned it back on
and he left it was like
now the wall was on fire and the
floor was covered with water and there
was five times as much water running out
of the
tap this was not an improvement i joked
with my wife that he was an anti-plumber
you know like
like like an anti-matter plumber and if
he ever
met a real plumber on the road and shook
his hand they'd both
disappear in a puff of light so
so that was one plumber and you know
and then another plumber we were we were
redoing our house in toronto and
it was the day before the drywallers
were supposed to come in and so we were
working like mad
because drywallers like they're fun to
watch man they zip in they lift up their
piece of drywall they
zip it up with their screws and they're
really fast at it and
it's quite quite a skilled operation and
but they're really fast and they don't
muck about and so you have to be ready
for the drywallers and so
this guy had redone all our pipes pvc
plastic pipe and
you put this that together with a kind
of solvent so you just
put solvent on one end of the pipe the
male end and
you put it into the female end with some
solvent and they stick together and
hopefully it seals and he said my joints
never leak
and so we tested them we went up on this
roof
three floors up and filled the pipes up
with water and
his joints leaked like 32 joints leaked
with four inches of water in the
basement and this was the day before the
dry waters were supposed to show up and
then also we found that he had put a lot
of the pipes
outside of the wall where the drywall
was going to be
which actually also constitutes a
mistake right because
i don't know about your house but but my
house isn't a house where there's
plumbing
sticking randomly out of the walls so we
had to spend the whole night redoing all
the joints and and
cutting the pipes and you know putting
the way they were supposed to and
and so and so that's a bad plumber
and so we're going to make the case that
there are bad plumbers
you know and and they don't know what
they're doing and so
so don't have any skill or maybe they're
worse than
not skilled they make things worse
because that's worse than just not
skilled
and then you could say well maybe they
lie to you when when they deal with you
and maybe they overcharge you
and maybe they don't treat their
employees very well you know and maybe
they're not good to live with at home
either who the hell knows but they're
not good plumbers
and so we're going to say that just in
the plumbing domain which is an
important domain
skill matters right that seems
reasonable
and then we might say the same thing
about well what probably matters in law
like if you ever need a lawyer i would
recommend that you get a good one
because if you get a bad one it's going
to cost you a lot more than if you get a
good one
like like everything and you know
they're good teachers and
not so good teachers and they're good
massage therapists and they're good
nurses and there are horrible nurses
and there are great surgeons and then
there are surgeons that will
definitely kill you you know and you you
want to go to one that won't kill you
that's that's the and you you'd assume
difference in skill
you know and whatever your occupation is
you know bloody well
maybe you're a shorter cook at a diner
and like some short order cooks can whip
up a pretty damn
decent breakfast in three or four
minutes and you're pretty bloody happy
to sit there and eat it
and other short order cooks can produce
some
god-awful mess of of burnt eggs and
wretched toast and rancid bacon and
orange juice that's like had a crayon
dipped in it for the color
and with with a really ornery uh
waitress and coffee that's
been cooking since like 1953 and
there's a that's a big difference in
short order cooks there's
qualitative difference in skill okay and
so one of the things we might point out
is that part of the reason
that we have hierarchies in the west is
because people actually differ in skill
not power skill some people are better
at
whatever it is they're supposed to be
doing than other people and we think
that what they're supposed to be doing
is important so that it matters that
they're better at it
and what are we going to do we're going
to deny that skill plays a role
all the evidence suggests that it does
like if you look at what predicts
long-term success from a psychological
perspective
in a given occupation conscientiousness
is the best
personality predictor and conscientious
people are dutiful and hard-working
and they have integrity and they do what
they say they're going to do and so
that's the best predictor
second best predictor and the best
predictor is intelligence and so
it looks like in a relatively
complicated occupation
if you're going to be successful in a
western culture
the best predictors of your success is
whether you're intelligent
skilled and conscientious and that's
pretty good like
how else would you want it to be if
you're going to set it up
and it isn't power because agreeableness
is another dimension you can be
disagreeable
men are more disagreeable than women by
the way and
if our society was fundamentally based
on power
then the most disagreeable people would
be the most successful
and they're not they're the ones that
are most likely to be imprisoned
so so that evidence just doesn't support
that and then you know
the other thing is is you don't have you
imagine well
our society is fundamentally an
oppressive patriarchy and everything's
based on power
it's like okay so you need a plumber and
so what you do
is you go out in the street or maybe you
don't maybe you cower at home and these
like gangs of plumbers come to your
house and they're armed to the damn
teeth with their pipes and they say look
i don't know whether you need
like some plumbing work done or not but
maybe we'll come in here and break a few
things so that
so that you do need it but even if we're
not going to do that it's like
we're the plumbers that are going to
take you out unless you call us
and so the next time the toilet
overflows man
here's the number and you better put it
on your fridge or there's going to be
hell to pay
or you know the same is the case of like
gang affiliated massage therapist
exactly the same thing tattooed to the
hilt right arm to the teeth
and and roaming the streets making
bloody sure that if you have a stiff
neck
that the most powerful massage therapist
is the one that you're going to call
first
you know it's complete bloody rubbish
it's absolutely not the case now it is
the case that
even in a hierarchy that's functional
the thing can go sideways and it does
you know you get companies that get too
big they start to get corrupt
people who play politics and who are
good at manipulating start to rise up
the hierarchy
the the structure stops performing
its function its useful function in the
way that it should
it starts to degenerate but generally
then it dies
you know like the typical fortune 500
company only lasts 30 years and the
typical family fortune only three
generations
it's not that easy to keep a functional
enterprise going you have to be awake
and so no it's not an oppressive
patriarchy our culture
that's wrong it's based on competence
fundamentally
imperfect as that is it's not like we
don't make hiring mistakes
it's not like there aren't people who
are foolish and blind
and higher and fire based on attributes
that have nothing to do with
competence but that's a sign of the
deterioration of the system and the
corruption of the system
and not an indication of its fundamental
function
and it's also the case that and this is
partly what i tried to outline in
rule one which is pretty much the rule
we're going to discuss today
um
part of your goal if you want to take
your place in the hierarchy properly
is to be a good person and that was the
argument i was trying to make
in the chapter not that you're supposed
to be like
the most brutal crustacean on the block
you know it's so foolish was kathy
newman
i think that asked me in in in the uk
so you're saying that human society
should be organized
along the lines of lobsters it's like
look lady
if you're gonna if you're gonna insult
someone
you might want to try accusing them of
something
of believing something that someone
somewhere
believed at least once in the entire
history of the human race
and not that yes absolutely lobsters for
everyone you know
that's how what i was trying to make the
case was that
we have this very old system in our
nervous systems which is very old
which keeps track of where we are in
hierarchies
and that regulates our emotions because
of it because it's really
important to you and you and you and you
if you're not completely bloody
psychopathic
that you have a place in a social
hierarchy
and that you're admired and respected
and valued by other people and it's so
important that that the neurochemical
system that keeps track of that
regulates your other emotions so that if
you're
low on the totem pole because well for
whatever
the reason happens to be sometimes you
deserve it sometimes it's accidental
sometimes you've been hurt
there's lots of ways that that that that
this can happen
your serotonin levels plummet like a
defeated lobster
and then you you feel way more negative
emotion about everything
and way less positive emotion about
everything
and that's absolutely dreadful like it's
it's that's
clinical depression and it's a terrible
terrible condition
and so it's absolutely crucial that you
maintain
a tenable position in a hierarchy and
not have one of power but one of
competence
and at least even if you're not in a
position that's tenable
you're moving upward towards one that's
tenable
because that at least gives you hope you
know because maybe you're young and
useless and you don't know what the hell
you're doing you're just getting started
and so you're low man on the totem pole
but it's not like you're stuck there
forever
you do some decent work i had some kid
tell me the other day it was really nice
it was just last night was it a comedy
show i went to here and
um a lot of the comedians knew us
reuben and i went in there and so a lot
of them knew us which was quite
interesting and one of them said
god you know i was in a rough shape two
years ago i was just getting married
i just got married and i was nihilistic
as hell and depressed and bitter and
things weren't going well for me at all
and uh
and i was unemployed and one of my
friends got me a job and he said i'd
really liked a bloody job i didn't want
to have the job and
i was kind of dragging my ass to the
work and not doing it well and i
listened to one of your lectures and it
said look
if you haven't got anything going for
you but you have a job
don't quit your job
whether you hate it or not it's like man
that's what you're hanging on to the
edge of the world with your fingertips
you know
don't let go oh if you can find a better
job okay fine but you don't just quit
because then what you're done and he and
he said
and another thing that i had mentioned
was uh why don't you just try to work as
hard as you can at your damn job for
like six weeks
right all flat out you know if you work
10 longer hours
you make 40 percent more money
that's something worth thinking about
you know you've got a job maybe you show
up
15 minutes early and you leave 15
minutes late
you know when you actually work and your
boss notices because people would
probably notice and then maybe
someone's going to get promoted and
maybe it'll be you
because something's gonna tilt the
scales and
that little extra bit of work done
without cynicism and resentment might be
enough
well he said he started at 21 bucks an
hour and in six weeks he was making 37
an hour and it's not a king's ransom man
but it's a hell of a lot more than
zero and it's quite a lot more than 21.
he said his life had turned around
substantially because he learned if he
put some damn effort into it and i'm not
trying to be
joel optimist here like i know that
people
hit runs of bad luck and that things can
take you out of life right
unfortunate illnesses and and and and
betrayal and like there's no shortage of
randomness and horror that can
wipe you out even if you're doing your
best but you don't have a better
bloody plan than to do your best and it
tends to work a lot better than you
think and
what's so interesting about the
hierarchies that people set up is that
that's how they're set up they're not
set up on
power they're set up on reciprocity and
skill
and trust not always you know and if
you're in a job where
you work hard and you're a good guy and
and you're doing your best
and your boss is a bloody tyrant and you
never get a break it's like
okay fine you're you're you're in a fuco
world get the hell out of it you know
you
get your resume set up write your cv
fill in the educational gaps that you
can have that you have
send out your 25 resumes a day and
prepare to make a lateral move
because you're in a bad place but almost
everywhere and this certainly been the
case
virtually everywhere i've worked and
i've had like 50 jobs you know
if you go above and beyond the call of
duty you know and
wake an intelligent way interpersonally
socially with regards to the diligence
of your work with regards to the truth
of your attitude and your courage and
all of that
that will work and you know if you try
it for a year and it doesn't work
then go somewhere else because you can
right you're free i mean
it's not easy you can't just walk out
the door and instantly find another job
but you're not enslaved
you could make a move you could even
decide that you're going to make a move
and double your salary
you know it's not a bad goal and it's
certainly a possibility
it's like it isn't hierarchy it's ethics
that determines success in a functional
society
it's ethics that determines success not
power
the rest of it's a bloody lie and that
doesn't mean that all our systems are
perfectly ethical
you know you got to be awake if you're
in a system there's going to be some
corruption in it
part of what you're supposed to do is
keep your damn eyes open for the
corruption
and your mouth speaking truth so when
the corruption starts to take root
you object to it so the whole damn
system doesn't turn into a pathological
power play
and that's part of your ethical
responsibility as a conscious being an
ethical being
a religious being for that matter and a
citizen
you know and and you're charged with
that that's why you're that's why
you vote that's why you're the
cornerstone of your state man
you're you're the you're the you're the
what would you call you're the
you're the wellspring of the ethical
actions that replenish the dying world
that's what you are and if you if you
act that's
really that's what you are and if you
act that
out properly then things work and that's
why that's always been described as
ethical behavior it's not because you're
supposed to be
good you know and being good isn't that
easy anyways and it certainly doesn't
mean being nice and harmless
it's not an easy thing to be good you
have to be tough as a damn
boot to be good because you have to
stand your ground when you need to stand
your ground and you have to be able to
say no
when it's time to say no and you have to
mean it and so then you have to think
and plan strategically so that when
you're going to say no
you can mean it and it will stick you
know and that takes a certain amount of
that takes a certain amount of
integrated malevolence i would say and
and
once it's integrated it's not
malevolence it's strength it's
it's strength of character it's the
ability to stand your ground
and you have to cultivate that and you
cultivate that at least in part by
telling the truth
and so you take your place in the world
as a decent person and as a decent
citizen and then
and you play the hierarchical game
properly and that is to stand up
straight with your shoulders back it's
like
the world's an onslaught you've got the
tyranny of culture to deal with
you've got the catastrophe of nature
you've got your own damn malevolence and
ignorance right
all coming at you plus the incredible
complicated
indeterminate potential of the future
that's all
coming at you and it's all your
responsibility and you can cringe away
from it and be afraid of it and be
victimized by it
and be bitter and cynical about it and
and no wonder because it can be painful
or you can turn around and you can say
man bring it on
because there's more to me than there is
to the catastrophe
and this is what i discovered from
looking at what i looked at i looked at
the darkest things i could look at
really for 30 years i was really a lot
of fun to be around i can tell you
i looked at the darkest things that i
could think of right not only what
happened in auschwitz and what happened
in the gulag but
but personal issues you know it's like i
wasn't so much interested in the
totalitarians
as a group i was interested in the
people who undertook the terrible acts
that the totalitarians required
you know the people who i was just
rereading ordinary men and it was a
story about a police battalion in
poland that trained ordinary policemen
to take naked pregnant women
out into the fields and and and shoot
them in the back of the head
it takes a lot of training by the way
before you can bring yourself to do that
and you aren't the same person by the
end of it it's pretty goddamn horrific
you know when i was trying to figure out
what would it be like
to be that person because we are
that person and then what would it be
like to not
be that person right to refuse to do
that to not participate in that
you know and and what i discovered by
making that totalitarian proclivity
personal was that there was there's more
to us than there is to the horror
these nature is bent on our destruction
bad as culture is tyrannical and bloody
back as far as you can look
as malevolent as you are in in the
darkest part of your heart
and that's plenty malevolent the the
possibility that's within you that can
well
up the courage and the truth and the
ability and the skill
and and the and the willingness to set
things right if you are willing to set
them right is more powerful than
all of that and so it's so interesting
it was it was proof for me of an
old saying i i read from carl jung it's
an alchemical
motif in stir qualis inventor which is
what you most want to be found will be
found where you least want to look
essentially and it's so interesting
because it means that
if you're willing to turn around and to
stand up stay and stand up straight
and face the darkness like fully what
you discover
at the darkest part is the
brightest light and then not something
that's so much
worth discovering because there's going
to be
terrible darkness in your life and it's
going to make you cynical and bitter
and it could easily be that you're just
not looking at it enough
because if you looked at it enough and
you didn't shy away and you brought
everything you had to bear on it
you'd find that there was more to you
than there was to the horror you know
i watched my father-in-law
i'll end with this
and you know you don't know a because
you're not bringing your a-game to the
table
with all that cynicism and bitterness
and resentment
willful blindness and avoidance maybe
you're playing at 60 percent
it's not good enough because there's too
much of what's bad
for 60 to be good enough it's like you
need 90
or 95 or 100 percent my
when when when about 15 20 years ago
my mother-in-law developed um
a pre-frontal temporal dementia
which i wouldn't recommend you know it's
one of those degenerative neurological
diseases like alzheimer's and those
bloody things are
like they're in the top echelon of awful
you know you watch a person
deteriorate before your eyes it's a
lengthy lengthy death
and and it was slow
and her husband he was he lived in this
little town that i grew up in about 3
000 people
he was quite a character man everybody
knew him i bought him a foghorn leghorn
t-shirt once
because that's kind of what he was like
he's loud and sort of bombastic but he
stood up straight i can tell you
and he played the fool a little bit
mostly for the amusement of people but
he was no damn fool
and and i always admired him and liked
him and and the feeling was
was mutual thank god since i married his
daughter
and uh you know he drank a lot with his
crazy friends up in northern alberta and
he wasn't at home a lot because he was
working a lot and and
you know he was kind of a party animal
about town but a good businessman and a
good man
and and then his wife got sick and they
moved to another town and
you know he took care of her for like 15
years
it was unbelievable as she deteriorated
you know and she got more desperate to
have him around
her love for him never never
went away even even as she lost herself
almost completely
she would always light up when
when he came into the room you know
and he took care of her right till
within weeks of her death he
had to finally put her in an old folks
home because he was no longer strong
enough
to lift her up from the chair and we
interacted with him a lot
you know because we were trying to help
him figure out how to cope and we had
signs put up in the house electronic
signs that would tell her when she when
he was leaving so that she
would know where she he went and we had
recordings in the bathroom so that she
knew what to do when she went into the
bathroom and we tried to do everything
we could to
not make this absolutely bloody
atrocious experience
complete hell and he participated the
whole way
you know it was really something to see
it was really
left me with a tremendous sense of
admiration for him but but not
just for him but for people who can do
that
you know when if if there was a new
decline he took it on
and and he didn't complain about it he
tried to do what he could you know and
and like it was no picnic don't get me
wrong but it wasn't hell
and and then we were all gathered around
the death bed her mother's
my wife's mother's death bed and that
the family was there and they got along
pretty well you know what
her sister's a palliative care nurse and
the other one's a pharmacy a pharmacist
and
none of them are particularly afraid of
of illness and death you know they're a
pretty tough
group and so you know they made sure
their mother's lips were wet while she
was no longer eating or drinking and and
tried to make her comfortable and
they're around the death bed and they
were kind of getting along you know it
wasn't
family feud at mother's death time and
that was kind of nice
and and she died and that was that and
but it wasn't just that because
the fact that the family had coped with
it well and nobly and honorably i would
say brought them together
they were closer afterwards than they
were before and they
all had more respect for their father
and then in the
old hole in the old folks home he met
another woman
who had a husband there who had
alzheimer's
and they got to know each other you know
and he died after a while and she died
after a while and then a few months
later they started going out
and then eventually they had a
relationship and now they live together
and so
he gained something like it wasn't that
he replaced what he lost
you know what i mean because he still
has pictures of his
of his wife up in his house and she was
the love of his life and that's not
going away but
you know his family respected him more
and everybody pulled together more and
it wasn't
hell at the death that it was just
tragedy and the family pulled together
more
and that was a good example of of how
you can extract at least a certain
amount of light out of what
out of out of what's dark even at a
personal level
and it's worth asking yourself it's like
drop what you're doing that's foolish
that you know is foolish
and pick an aim that's worthwhile you
know to make things better for yourself
like you're worth taking care of like
you're worth something you know
and to surround yourself with people who
who believe the same and who are
what rejoicing in your accomplishments
and unhappy when you fail
right and you're comparing yourself to
your accomplishments of yesterday and
not to someone else's today so that
you're not
jealous and bitter and you put your own
house in order
so that you're not cursing the world
when some of its disarray might be your
fault
and you're trying to pursue something
meaningful and you're doing your best to
tell the truth
and all of that and then you see what
happens
who the hell are you you know you think
you're a miracle of some bloody bizarre
sort we've been around for three and a
half billion years
you know every single one of your
relatives
propagated successfully and here you are
against
all possible odds in this in this world
of hell
in some sense and and and bitterness and
and and and and and tyranny and
malevolence
and yet god only knows what's inside you
this capacity for consciousness the
capacity
to confront potential and to turn it
into something good
that's us man that's the western story
that's the individual as the cornerstone
of the state
that's our responsibility and it really
is who we are
and so we need to know that and we need
to remember it and we need to act it out
and then maybe we can see what we can do
about it you know and see
how good we could make things and maybe
that would be the purpose of your damn
life
right not to be happy it's like there's
problems to be solved
be happy after you solve the goddamn
things
right
so i learned because i looked at dark
things that i learned that the light was
more powerful than the darkness as far
as the
i was concerned and that people will re
capable each of us of remarkable things
and that we need to know that that's
what we are where this consciousness
that confronts
potential with all its catastrophe
that's what we are that's what makes us
in the image of god that's what gives us
our
intrinsic value and that idea that we
have intrinsic value that's the bedrock
presupposition of our
state we're going to question that we're
going to live it out
better to live it out find out who you
are
thank you very much
[Applause]
all right so now we're going to try to
plow through as many questions as we can
all right okay okay
all right here we go i thought this was
the most important one that i saw it got
73 upvotes which was the most tonight
do you think joe rogan is as deep and
sophisticated as he seems or is he just
a stoner
[Laughter]
um i've been in a room with lots of
smart people
where joe was in the same room
and it wasn't obvious that he wasn't the
smartest person in the room
so you know he's he's one of those
characters who's not
he's not a formal intellectual but often
really smart people who
have taught themselves you know and sort
of come up
in the world through their own devices
have a
uh an original intelligence that's not
so obvious among say the more
classically
university educated more cookie cutter
and joe joe is uh he's a remarkable guy
i mean you think
he's tough as a boot that's the first
thing he's a fighter
that's that takes a lot of bravery he's
damn funny
like pro level funny his net and and and
often viciously funny the thing he did
on the kardashians
that was just man i just couldn't
believe that he would go that far it was
just
it was just my jaw just kept opening
more and more as he became
more and more of like he was just like
what what gargoyle on a bed post right
whispering in
in jenner's ear yeah god
very politically incorrect very funny
and he's very brave
and he he knows that there's a lot of
things he doesn't know so he's got
a really intelligent humility so ask
intelligent questions
and you know so he's been successful at
like five things
so um he's no he's certainly not
just a stoner that's for sure i got lots
of respect for him
the quick follow-up on that obviously is
will the two of us smoke a blunt on
stage
do you have one
i'm sure it could be a rain
no no probably that wouldn't be i think
it's still illegal here isn't it
yes it is yes it is one guy said no
it's not illegal in canada i'll tell you
we just
we just made it legal and now everyone
is stoned
all the time especially in the winter
when you should be stoned
do your best aussie accent saying
good day mate no way
i'm not doing that no way no i can't do
jokes on command
it makes me turn red and then i sweat
and i have this rule that i don't say
things that make me turn red and sweat
so all
they went funny this group uh who would
win in a cage fight between a
serotonin-filled lobster and a petted
house cat
and a white house cat a petted
well it would depend on the size of the
lobster
right i mean equal weight i i bet i'd
better
i'd bet on the lobster equal weight i'd
better the lobster
if it was a 60-pound lobster there'd be
no competition
one snip that'd be that but equal weight
the lobster would win
i like how he can give a scientific
answer to even that especially
underwater
this is a good one what does the b in
jordan b peterson stand for
it stands for barrent and it's a
norwegian name
and it means bear and
and not the naked kind the other kind
and
um and it was my great grandfather's
name and he built a
boat and sailed it from norway to new
york with
like 14 other people yeah so
and he was quite the cool character he
he was a he was a blacksmith and
a bit of a mechanical engineer he built
farm equipment for his farm in
saskatchewan he homesteaded there they
built a log cabin they cleared the land
it was tough work a tough life and and
he was
he raised my father mostly my father
admired him greatly he died when i was
fairly young but i remember him and so
that's that's where the baron comes from
you're stuck on an island and you can
only bring
three things what are they
uh well a powerboat with a lot of gas
[Laughter]
did peterson three things
well an axe like obviously
um you definitely need an axe a knife
that would be good knife axe
flint that'd be good
hey isn't isn't it the australian guy i
might be wrong about this but there's
this
there's this youtube show i watch about
this guy who goes out in the i think an
outback
like with nothing he just wears shorts
and he goes out there and like builds
little cities
you know what's it called
yeah yeah that's right that's right i
mean i think that guy's absolutely
unbelievable you know it's so fun to
watch him it's like
i've got some shorts then he goes out
and he gets a stick and a rock and he
makes an axe and then he cuts down a
bunch of trees
small trees and he makes a house and
then he builds a floor and then he
builds a
like a heated floor which is really
quite cool then he builds a water wheel
and it's
it's it's amazing it's amazing to watch
him but i'd still i'd still go for the
axe i'd like the axe and the knife and
the flint and i think i could maybe not
die instantly if i had those three
things
well i'm going to read this one just
because it's like man they've got like
you know the most influential public
intellectual we've got and this was the
question they came up with
so i just have to read it i guess i
bring my wife too but i don't think that
would make her very happy
imagine i was having my wishes you know
i'm on the island
a genie shows up you get three wishes
axe
poof knife poof wife
poof it's like what the hell did you
bring me to this island for
i don't think that'd be good all right
well wait till this one
who is your pick to win the wwe
universal championship
at wrestlemania this year seth rollins
or will brock lesnar retain oh it's
brock it's brock for sure
it's brock i have no idea who brock is
by the way
the name today sounds great
all right let's shift gears a little bit
how many upvotes did that question get
that one got 12. 12. it's like 12 that's
really what 12 of you wanted to know
you don't want to know how many you're
asking what kind of underwear you wear
all right i'll tell you what kind of
underwear i'm wearing all right i've
never done this before
all right you're gonna do it it's funny
my wife bought me underwear with moose
on them
and so i i have to tell you that because
that's a canadian thing
like underwear not underwear
like underwear with moose and so i just
couldn't believe she bought me these and
they're actually quite nice which i also
can't believe because
i don't understand how red underwear
covered with moose can also be nice
but as far as underwear go they beat the
hell out of
tidy whities says the guy wearing a blue
tie with lobsters on it
hey well i keep getting these as gifts
man you you can't believe how much
lobster themed
clothing there is
[Applause]
all right let's shift gears a little bit
has the sudden rise to fame over
inflated your ego
and if if so how do you regulate it
oh i'm married
well you know more importantly i'm
married to someone who's very sensible
you know and and she doesn't let things
go to her head
really she she doesn't get overly
upset and desperate when things are
overly upsetting and desperate and she
doesn't get
overly enthusiastic and narcissistic
when things are
going well she's very level-headed
and and you know when we've been through
a lot we're we're not
kids my wife and i we're both damn near
60.
you know and we've had we've had our
kids and we have grandkids and
we've traveled all over the world and
met all sorts of people and done all
sorts of things and so
you know we're reasonably sensible and
to the degree that we're not we
sort of butt up against each other and
try to make ourselves slightly more
sensible than we are
and so that's helpful and also over the
last couple of years
you know i've had people i've been
watching very carefully because well
especially for the first year and a half
because i was always one utterance away
from complete bloody disaster
and so i was watching what i was saying
and doing very carefully but i had
people around me who were doing the same
you know my
my wife being foremost my two kids who
were both
awake you know and careful and they were
keeping a close eye on things and my
parents are still alive and
and they were watching as well and i
have a group of friends
some of whom i lost some friends but i
kept a number of them
and they were watching very carefully
and letting me know when i was
not you know a little too angry maybe or
a little too acerbic
or or or
arrogant all those things they'd let me
know right away
and so um and i i've i've been a
psychologist for a long time and i know
especially from reading carl jung about
the danger of ego inflation
it's not something that you want to mess
with it's very dangerous and
you know i tell these archetypal stories
a lot
and i learned from jung 30 years ago
that
knowing the stories doesn't make you the
archetype
and that's very very very important to
understand you know and so i'm
i try to be cognizant of my shortcomings
which are manifold and to be grateful
that's a good thing you know like
tonight here you all are
and i'm really happy about that pleased
about that and and i would say
grateful is a rough word to use because
it's kind of it's been overused you know
it's been it's been used by people who
who
it's been used to signal a virtue that
is non-existent often but
i am grateful for this because it's so
unlikely
you know that that there's 5 500 of us
here sitting together in peace and
tranquility and harmony
trying to think hard about what we
should be doing in our lives and how we
can make
ourselves better in a non-naive and and
non
and non what would you call it it's
it's it's that
there's a kind of striving for goodness
that isn't
virtuous and i i think it's the it's the
praying in public kind it's the i'm
against poverty sign
kind i'm hoping what this is is that
it's
it's the old original sin kind you know
it's like
yeah christ there's plenty wrong with me
and i include myself in this all the
time you know i know there's plenty
wrong with me it's like
it'd be good if something could be done
about it even a little bit and
and maybe that would make things a bit
better for everybody and maybe that's a
noble goal and
maybe we can come and have a serious
conversation about that for
two hours and think hard about it and
maybe
we can turn around our lives a little
bit and and because i think we can do
that and
and that it's possible for each person
to make things around them
way better than they are you know not
always because sometimes you're in such
a dire goddamn situation that
that basically all you've got is sl
hope for slightly less hell you know but
man you can make a huge difference in
your life
to take care of yourself properly and a
huge difference in your family's life
and a huge difference in your
community's life and
and it would be so good if we could
people wonder what's the meaning of life
like what's it all about what's
what justifies the suffering and the
misery and all of that it's like
well that's what justifies it it's like
you put yourself up against that you
think okay
all with all of this pushing against me
how much can i push back
could i move the horror an inch back
with with all the strength that i have
at my disposal man and the answer to
that is
yeah you can it it it makes you
better with regards to yourself but it
also makes the world a better place
and so well so you know more of that
and and you don't want to be you don't
want to be you don't want to be uh
narcissistic or or egotistic about that
because it just gets in the way
you know and one of the things i learned
from from solzhenitsyn this was
an unbelievably useful man this is a
pronoun thing
this is a pronoun thing
about 30 years ago i came across this
website
that was that had been produced by this
guy who was a paranoid schizophrenic
and he was an aerospace engineer in
england and he was no
fool he's a real genius he put together
a really interesting site
and he had this delusion he had
developed this delusion that
he was the center of the world and he
had this really complicated explanation
because
he lived in the geographic center of
england
and he thought of england as the center
of the word
that had spread around the world and he
lived right in the middle of the town
that was in the geographic center and so
his schizophrenic fantasy had
put him at the center of the world the
center
and he'd made a very elaborate web page
about all of this
and uh and then
at the and so so i was thinking about
that this the center of the world i was
also reading solzhenitsyn at the same
time and solzhenitsyn said
you know that the world is constituted
and this is the
this is one of the fundamental axioms of
western civilization is the world is
constituted so that
each person is a center of the world
like literally that we can't understand
this because we can't understand how
something could be
constructed so that that could be the
case because we're used to things having
one center
but the universe isn't like that it has
multiple centers
every conscious being is a center
and and a center of of infinite scope in
some sense
you know like bounded but but infinite
which is also very difficult to
understand
and and
there's a big difference between being
the center of the world
and as center of the world so
if you remember that you're a center of
the world
then you stay sane but as soon as you
start thinking that you're the center of
the world well then you know
you're you're just done and it's not
going to be helpful
and like even if you are doing the best
you can
you know you invite everyone else along
it's like i'm doing the best i can but
there's way more work to do man
and we're everybody needs to participate
and everybody's participation that's the
other thing that's so weird about it
everybody's participation is vital there
isn't anybody that
it isn't okay for anyone not to be
in the game you know and and i don't
understand that
exactly as well but that also has
something to do with our
like our being made in the image of god
and and
the central value and divinity of our
consciousness
the consciousness that gives rise to
being itself
these are truths you know these are
truths
it's consciousness that gives rise to
being from from
from possibility and and and that's us
that's what we do and we decide is it
going to be better is it going to be
worse
and if it's better well that's on you
man because you made it a little better
and if it's worse that's on you too and
that's your destiny
every day and that's what gives you your
intrinsic value and the
and the and the meaning of your life the
significance of your life
and the effect of you on the structure
of reality itself
that's all that's all you and it's a
miracle
you know and and that is why i believe
fully that's why it says in the in
genesis that human beings are made in
the image of god god is what extracts
order from chaos
from potential it's like i don't i think
that that's
i don't think that can be said in any
way that's more true than that
and it's it's a hell of a thing to
contemplate and especially when you
think that you actually believe it
you know because you do believe that you
have intrinsic value our whole legal
system is predicated on the idea that
you have intrinsic value
even if you're a murderer even if you're
accused of something absolutely highness
there's still something about you that
has value outside of the dictates of the
state
and you treat other people like that you
know if you're going to have a
friendship with someone
or an intimate relationship or a love
for a child or a parent
you treat them as if they have intrinsic
and transcendent
value it's like well is it true or not
and if it's true well maybe it's an ex
maybe it's an
inexhaustible source from which you can
draw
it's possible it seems to be the case
and it it's worth the experiment because
like what the hell else do you have to
do that's
better than to try that so
no so that's that answer
well here's a segway will you
run for prime minister of australia
people ask me that in different places
i've talked to lots of politicians and
i'm talking to more of them all the time
and i'm interested in i'm not interested
in politics so much
i don't think i have the temperament for
it to tell you the truth because i don't
think i could take
the i don't really think i could take
the
what is it the it's sort of the vicious
boxing
you know like i i have a reputation
i guess of enjoying conflict but i don't
enjoy conflict
at all it really bothers me actually
but i don't shy away from it
either and that's because i know that
sometimes
and this is what i've learned from being
a clinical psychologist in part
a serious clinical psychologist is like
if i walk into a room and there's
trouble
i'm not going to pretend that the
trouble isn't there i won't do that
i'll point it out and so that kind of
makes me annoying
often and but i can't stand it if i can
see it and everyone's pretending you
know there's an elephant under the
carpet and everyone is
shifting in their chairs as the elephant
moves and they're all smiling away
stupidly as if everything's okay it's
like i'm not doing that
i'm gonna point it out and i don't like
that because
if it's usually not an elephant either
it's usually some god-awful monster and
it's been there for a long time
and no one wants to admit to its
existence
and so that makes for difficult
conversations but i don't enjoy them
but i know perfectly well that things
that you hide grow
and i enjoy that a hell of a lot less so
anyways i'm not i'm not interested in
politics i don't believe because i don't
think i have the temperament for it but
i am interested in
aims and i am interested in trying to
figure out what we should be aiming at
because we need a new story you know
like
we're all bloody petrified in one way or
another and cynical about the
possibility of multiple apocalypses
because
one isn't enough and and we don't have a
counter story it's like okay well here's
a bunch of ways that things could go to
hell in a hand basket it's like well
what could we build instead
you know who knows what we could do we
could irrigate all the world's deserts
you know that might be a good thing to
do i mean maybe we want some desert
that'd be
we could keep some desert but we could
irrigate the dam deserts if we could get
if we could get our
our our our if we could become
sophisticated enough with regards to our
technological use of
energy it's not like we're going to run
out of energy it's like the world's
the universe is made out of energy and
matter we're not going to run out of it
you know i mean and we could make sure
everybody had
a high quality education and that child
mortality was cut to almost nothing and
that we were
taking full advantage of everyone's
talents to the best of our ability and
like i'm interested in establishing
these aims
and and so and i am working on that with
all sorts of people in canada and the
united states and to some degree in
australia and in other countries
trying to understand well we need a
noble
aim for christ's sake what the hell
we've got all this technological power
and it's multiplying like mad and all
this wealth
it's like what could we make the world
into
let's let's find out
what the hell you know we've got to
stake our lives on something and that's
that's better than politics that it's
it's it's
it's it's it's better than
it's a better role for me
all right so we got time for one more
what is a great day for jordan peterson
look like
well there's a couple of kinds of great
days i would say
um it's a great day
if i have a chance to spend it with my
with my wife and my kids
that's that's generally a great day i
get along very well with my kids and
i get along as well as anybody would
want to
with my wife and so um
well and i say that specifically because
you know
uh if you if you're fortunate in your
partner you have someone to contend with
not not someone that you just always get
along with you have someone that you're
you know you're you're you're contending
with
there's a story in in the abrahamic
stories where it's
it's it's jos joseph jacob
jacob becomes israel i believe i'm
hoping that's right
he's kind of a trickster and and and he
causes all sorts of trouble and
at one point um when he's going back to
reconcile himself with his estranged
brother
he sends his family across the river and
is laying on the banks alone and
an angel comes to wrestle with them it's
actually god
and they wrestle all night and weirdly
enough jacob wins and
god dislocates his hip because he's god
you know
he's not going to let you just walk away
so he
dislocates his hip and and then he
renames him israel
and israel means he who struggles with
god and that's something really worth
knowing man
you know because what that means is that
at the basis of
our most profound stories is the notion
that
the founder of the holy state is the
person who wrestles with god
and that doesn't mean believe in god you
know it that that isn't what it means it
means
contends it's like this is this is this
this is this reality that confronts us
is a rough
and harsh place right it's not for it's
not for the weak of heart it's not for
the faint of heart
it's for it's for the person who wants
to step forward and contend
and it turns out that if you're that
person you wrestle with god
which means that you try to defeat it
defeat
there's a there's a vic an attempt to be
to attain
victory even over god of all the strange
things
and that's what makes you part of the
holy state it's like it's that
it's an unbelievable idea and i think
it's so realistic
that you want something to contend with
you know
and if you have a good marriage and
maybe if you have good friendships for
that matter
you have someone to contend with and in
my wife i have someone to contend with
and it's the case with my children as
well not to the same degree
because they're my children but it's a
good day when i have a chance to spend
it with them
and then this is a good day you know
which is why we keep doing this
you know like i think all the days we've
done this
have been good don't you think it's been
unbelievable man
i mean and and it's and i do mean
literally unbelievable every night you
think wow wow
really this is going to happen again
we're going to we're going to
like bring 3 000 people together and
this is what we're going to talk about
and and
it's going to be serious and we're going
to like aim high and
and and think critically and have a
genuine discussion and and
everyone's going to be like locked onto
that
that's amazing and so yeah these are
good days which is why
we keep doing them and so those are two
kinds of good days and
and and i'm fortunate to have them with
a fair degree of regularity
so
[Music]
well that right there is how you circle
up a show so i'm going to get out of the
way
and make some noise for dr jordan
peterson everybody thank you guys for
coming out tonight
thanks steve